---
title: Stream, Laziness and Stack Safety
date: 2017-09-30
---


This post contains some notes on chapter 5 (Strictness and laziness) of the [Functional Programming in Scala](https://www.manning.com/books/functional-programming-in-scala) book (a.k.a The Red Book). The chapter covers the basics of non-strict and lazy evaluation in Scala, as well as an implementation of `Stream`, a lazy version of `List`.

# Thunk vs. By-Name Parameter

A thunk is just a `Function0: () => A`, which takes an empty parameter list and produces a value of type `A`. A function value is considered fully evaluated (i.e., it is in normal form) even if it takes an empty parameter list. For example, when you create a function literal

```scala
val foo: () => Int = () => 2 + 3
```

The expression `2 + 3` is not evaluated when `foo` is created. It is only evaluated to normal form (i.e., 5) when you explicitly force it by calling `foo()`. Therefore, thunks can be used to make a method lazy in its parameters: just turn each parameter of type `A` into a parameter of type `() => A`.

A by-name parameter `a: => A` is also lazy, and is usually more convenient than thunks. If you have a function `foo(a: => A)`, the caller can just pass an `A` to `foo`, rather than having to convert it to a thunk `() => A`.

In some cases though, you have to use thunks, for example in case class constructors. A case class constructor cannot take by-name parameters, because each case class constructor parameter is treated as a `val` parameter, and `val` parameters cannot be by-name. This is why the `Stream` constructor `Cons` has to using thunks rather than by-name parameters. On the other hand, the smart constructor `cons` takes by-name parameters.

```scala
sealed trait Stream[+A]
case object Empty extends Stream[Nothing]
case class Cons[+A](h: () => A, t: () => Stream[A]) extends Stream[A]

object Stream {
  def cons[A](hd: => A, tl: => Stream[A]): Stream[A] = {
    lazy val head = hd
    lazy val tail = tl
    Cons(() => head, () => tail)
  }

  def empty[A]: Stream[A] = Empty
}
```

# Laziness and Stack Safety

Take a look at the following implementation of `toList` and `take` on `Stream`:


```scala
def toListUnsafe: List[A] = this match {
  case Cons(h, t) => h() :: t().toListUnsafe
  case _ => List()
}


def take(n: Int): Stream[A] = this match {
  case Cons(h, t) if n > 1 => cons(h(), t().take(n - 1))
  case Cons(h, _) if n == 1 => cons(h(), empty)
  case _ => empty
}
```

Both methods are recursive but not tail recursive. In terms of stack safety, `toListUnsafe` is not stack-safe: it can cause `StackOverflowError` when called on a large stream. To make it stack-safe we need to turn it into tail recursion using an inner helper function:


```scala
def toList: List[A] = {
  val buf = ListBuffer[A]()
  @tailrec
  def go(s: Stream[A]): List[A] = s match {
    case Cons(head, tail) =>
      buf += head()
      go(tail())
    case _ => buf.toList
  }
  go(this)
}
```

On the other hand, `take` is stack-safe and there is no need to make it tail recursive. The reason for the difference is where the recursion happens. In `toListUnsafe`, the recursion happens in the list constructor `::`, which is strict in both parameters. This means we must fully evaluate both `h()` and `t().toListUnsafe` before starting to evaluate `::`. In `take`, on the other hand, the recursion happens in the stream constructor `cons`, which is lazy in both parameters, so we can start evaluaing `cons` without evaluating `h()` or `t().take(n - 1)`.

In fact, this is exactly how [trampolining](http://free.cofree.io/2017/08/24/trampoline/) works.

To make this easier to see, let's use a concrete example. Suppose we have an infinite stream `s: Stream[Int] = 1, 2, 3,...` and let's see what happens when we call `s.take(5).toList`.

Since `s` matches the first `case` in `take`, we call `cons(h(), Stream(2, 3,...).take(4))`, without evaluating `h()` and `t().toList`, which returns `Cons(() => h(), () => Stream(2, 3,...).take(4))`. Note that this is a fully evaluated value and there is nothing to further reduce. So at this point, the `take` method returns, and its stack frame is popped off the stack.

Next we call `toList` on the value returned by `s.take(5)`, i.e., `Cons(() => h(), () => Stream(2, 3,...).take(4))`. It matches the `Cons(head, tail)` case where `head = () => h()` and `tail = () => Stream(2, 3,...).take(4))`. When `buf += head()` is called, `head()` is fully evaluated into an `A` in order to be added to `buf`. In this case `h()` evaluates to 1, and we add 1 to `buf`. We then recursively call `go(tail())` (since it is tail recursion, a recursive call does not consume an additional stack frame). `go` is strict, so `tail()` needs to be fully evaluated before `go()` is called.

Evaluating `tail()` means evaluating `Stream(2, 3,...).take(4)`. Similar as before, it is evaluated into `Cons(() => h(), () => Stream(3, 4,...).take(3))`. The execution continues till we have taken 5 elements from the original stream. During this process, we alternate between the execution of `take` and `toList`, in other words, we are trampoling.

This is also why it doesn't create an intermediate list when we call `Stream(1, 2, 3, 4).map(_ + 10).filter(_ % 2 == 0).toList`. It basically trampolines between `map`, `filter` and `toList`, and processes one element at a time.

What happens if we use `toListUnsafe`, as in `s.take(n).toListUnsafe`? We will still be trampolining between `take` and `toListUnsafe`, but it won't be stack-safe: each call to `take` will not consume an additional stack frame because it returns a `Cons` without immediately going into the next level of recursion; however, each recursive call to `toListUnsafe` will consume an additional stack frame since it is not tail recursion. This will cause `StackOverflowError` for a large `n`.

# foldRight Implementation

In The Red Book, the `foldRight` method on `Stream` is implemented in the following way:

```scala
def foldRight[B](z: => B)(f: (A, => B) => B): B =
  this match {
    case Cons(h,t) => f(h(), t().foldRight(z)(f))
    case _ => z
  }
```

Note that `f` takes the first parameter by value and second parameter by name. Taking the second parameter by-name enables `foldRight` to be used on large or even infinite streams, and it is always stack-safe.

I don't think there's any reason though, that the first parameter shouldn't also be by-name. In fact, I think it should be - there's no reason that the first parameter `A` has to be fully evaluated before `f` is called. Here's another implementation where both parameters of `f` are by-name:

```scala
def foldRight2[B](z: => B)(f: (=> A, => B) => B): B =
  this match {
    case Cons(h,t) => f(h(), t().foldRight(z)(f))
    case _ => z
  }
```

Let's implement `map` via `foldRight` and `foldRight2`, respectively, and see how they behave differently when mapping over a stream:

```scala
def map[B](f: A => B): Stream[B] = foldRight(empty[B])((h, t) => cons(f(h), t))

def map2[B](f: A => B): Stream[B] = foldRight2(empty[B])((h, t) => cons(f(h), t))
```

Let's create the following stream:

```scala
val s: Stream[Int] =
  cons(
    {println("One"); 1},
    cons(
      {println("Two"); 2},
      cons(
        {println("Three"); 3},
        cons({println("Four"); 4}, empty)
      )
    )
  )
```

Calling `s.map(_ + 10)` prints `One`, indicating that the head element in `s` is evaluated, while calling `s.map2(_ + 10)` does not. Thus `foldRight2`, in which both parameters to `f` are by-name, is useful if you want to transform a stream without forcing even a single element.

The Scala standard library also has a `Stream` type that is similar to the one in The Red Book, except that the head element in Scala's stream is strict, which means whenever you have a non-empty stream, the head element is always fully evaluated. If the above `s` is a Scala stream, `One` will be printed immediately when `s` is created.
