---
title: The fix Combinator in Scalaz
date: 2017-08-28
---

[Fixed-point combinator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fixed-point_combinator) is a really cool thing. It allows us to encode recursion in lambda calculus, which doesn't have built-in support for recursion. Computerphile recently made a [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9T8A89jgeTI) featuring professor Graham Hutton, author of the book "Programming in Haskell", giving a brief introduction to the Y combinator.

The Y combinator can encode recursion because for all term `f`, `Y f = f (Y f)`. This means that whenever we want to encode a recursive function:

```
f = <body containing f>
```

We simply bind `f` with `位`, i.e., define

```
g = 位f. <body containing f>
```
This removes the recursion - `g` is no longer recursive because `f` is now a parameter of `g`. Then, `Y g` is exactly what we want.

# Factorial via fix

Scalaz has a [quite elegant implementation](https://github.com/scalaz/scalaz/blob/02f50d88fa9f8e8f83b99d33a3216b56137872f8/core/src/main/scala/scalaz/std/Function.scala#L309) of the fixed-point combinator, making use of lazy value and call-by-name parameter:

{% highlight scala linenos %}
def fix[A](f: (=> A) => A): A = {
  lazy val a: A = f(a)
  a
}
{% endhighlight %}

To understand how this works, just remember that every time we need to evaluate `a`, we'll replace it with `f(a)` where `a` is a call-by-name parameter to `f`.

Let's try to implement the factorial function using `fix`. To do so, we can use an approach similar as encoding recursive functions in lambda calculus with the Y combinator: bind the function with `位`. That is, we turn the original factorial function,

```scala
val fac: Int => Int = n => if (n == 0) 1 else n * fac(n - 1)
```
which has type `Int => Int`, into


```scala
val gac = 位fac: Int => Int. n => if (n == 0) 1 else n * fac(n - 1)
```
This is obviously not valid Scala syntax; in Scala it basically is

```scala
val gac: (=> Int => Int) => Int => Int =
  fac => n => if (n == 0) 1 else n * fac.apply(n - 1)
```
which has type `(=> Int => Int) => Int => Int`. Then, passing it to the `fix` combinator will give us what we need.

Putting everything together, this is how we define the factorial function, `facF`, using the `fix` combinator:

```scala
val facF = fix[Int => Int](fac => n => if (n == 0) 1 else n * fac.apply(n - 1))
```

`facF` is no longer a recursive function, unlike the original `fac` (indeed, there is no `facF` in its definition). This is what fixed-point combinator is about: encoding recursive computation without using recursion. In practice, this doesn't really buy us anything, in particular, turning a recursive function into an equivalent non-recursive function using `fix` does *not* make the function stack-safe: if the original recursive function crashes with `StackOverflowError` on some input, the `fix` version will also crash with `StackOverflowError` on a similar sized input. One small benefit of `fix` is that when you turn a recursive function into the `fix` version, since the `fix` version is non-recursive, you are no longer required to give it a name, which can be handy in a few scenarios (after all, naming things is one of the [hardest things in computer science](https://twitter.com/codinghorror/status/506010907021828096)). 

Now let's see what happens when we call `facF(3)`:

```
facF(3) = fix(gac)(3)
```

What is `fix(gac)`? According to the definition of `fix`, `fix(gac)` returns some `a`, such that evaluating `a` will get us `gac(a)`. This means that when we evaluate `fix(gac)`, we get a `gac(fix(gac))`. So now we have

```
facF(3) = fix(gac)(3) = gac(fix(gac))(3)
```

Note that the first parameter of `gac`, i.e., `=> Int => Int`, is a call-by-name parameter. This means that we will not continue to evaluate `fix(gac)` in `gac(fix(gac))(3)`. If it were a call-by-value parameter (`Int => Int`), we would have to keep expanding `fix(gac)` into `gac(fix(gac))`, leading to infinite recursion:

```
gac(gac(gac(gac(gac(...
```

Instead, to evaluate `gac(fix(gac))(3)`, we enter the `gac` function. According to the definition of `gac`, we have

```
facF(3) = fix(gac)(3)
        = gac(fix(gac))(3)
        = 3 * fix(gac)(2)
```

So now, we can just keep evaluating it until `n = 0`:

```
facF(3) = fix(gac)(3)
        = gac(fix(gac))(3)
        = 3 * fix(gac)(2)
        = 3 * gac(fix(gac))(2)
        = 3 * 2 * fix(gac)(1)
        = 6 * fix(gac)(1)
        = 6 * gac(fix(gac))(1)
        = 6 * 1 * fix(gac)(0)
        = 6 * fix(gac)(0)
        = 6 * gac(fix(gac))(0)
        = 6 * 1
        = 6
```

Note that `gac(fix(gac))(0)` returns 1 directly, without evaluating the lazy parameter `fix(gac)`, hence the recursion terminates.

# Further Reading

The idea of fixed-point combinator is also applicable to types. It is possible to rewrite a recursive type into an equivalent, non-recursive type using a fixed-point type constructor. [Matryoshka](https://github.com/slamdata/matryoshka) is a library for working with fixed-point types.
